# FF Community Meeting 16.09.2023

_11 people were there. We had a nice meeting with food, good discussions and little presentations._

## Routing and future after OLSRv1

### Routing

We started with a little presentation overview from schmars. Some points were added in the discussion afterwards.

![](media/Screenshot%202023-09-16%20at%2015-18-58%20Encrypted%20Diagram.png)
![](media/Screenshot%202023-09-16%20at%2015-19-18%20Encrypted%20Diagram.png)

💬 Comments / Ideas from the discussion:
- Update campaign for old routers/firmware (service with replacement devices if needed)
- OLSRD/Babel hybrid setup might be a problem, we need to test
- Future DNS setup might be difficult. Maybe we should start first with a simple static, centralized DNS that mirrors the state of the mesh. When everything else works, we find a better, decentralized solution.
- Which TLD to use in the future? We should not use real TLD that is connected to any real person / identity. We need some research on this.

🚀 We had a consensus on the Bable migration path as it can be found in the presentation by shmars. This is represented by the [issues with the tag Babel migration](https://github.com/search?q=user%3Afreifunk-berlin+label%3A%22Babel+migration%22+state%3Aopen&type=issues&ref=advsearch).

### Gateways

We continued with an overview of the different gateways and the problems they have. Especially the legal access to is often not secured with a contract. Also we looked at the new planed gateways.

![](media/Screenshot%202023-09-16%20at%2015-19-28%20Encrypted%20Diagram.png)
![](media/Screenshot%202023-09-16%20at%2015-19-43%20Encrypted%20Diagram.png)

💬 Comments / Ideas from the discussion:
- Replace the discs of the buildbot with SSDs
- Move the stuff away from the racks into the tower with a small pc.
- The current setup will be documented in a private repository

## Firmware development

We started with a [little presentation](media/Firmware_Themenblock.pdf) by akira about the firmware.

### Language 

🚀 We had a consensus about the language. The code should be in english. The people can write the collaboration stuff (chat, mail, issues …) in the language that they prefer. For the first steps of new users or developers (website and simple install instructions) we want to be bilingual.

💬 Comments / Ideas from the discussion:
- Move Wiki content to a new markdown/hugo website and remove old documentation
- We need to make it easier for people to join freifunk and create feedback. The website needs a rewrite. ([berlin.freifunk.net_hugo #1](https://github.com/freifunk-berlin/berlin.freifunk.net_hugo/issues/1))

### Hackathons 

🚀 We would like to make hackathons again! The regular meetings beside the c-base meeting do not work, we will remove them from the wiki and will talk about flash parties / consultation hours in the future.

💬 Comments / Ideas from the discussion:
- There should be mentors for specific topics
- Flash parties should be separated from hackathons
- Preference for meeting on Sunday

### Firmware and Wizard

🚀 We had a consensus about the path to the future of the firmware, that tries to bring bbb-configs and falter back together:
1.  We would like to create a unified config file, that is in JSON, based on bbb-configs and with missing features (vlan / port config, ip pools for automatic selection, tunnel speed) from the [ffwizard_spec](https://github.com/freifunk-berlin/falter-ffwizard_spec/tree/main) added.
2. Next step is a validator for the new schema.
3. The new falter wizard should be able to read and create this config file.

This is represented by the [issues with the tag Unified firmware](https://github.com/search?q=user%3Afreifunk-berlin+label%3A%22Unified+firmware%22+state%3Aopen&type=issues&ref=advsearch).

💬 Comments / Ideas from the discussion:
- We should find a way to only have one firmware
- The key differences between falter config and bbb-config are: namesapces, vlans as default, tunnels
- Creating a wizard for a config file might be difficult
- One advantage of bbb-configs is that the config is writen into the image and could not be lost on reset. So we would like too keep it as a tool for creating such images on our devices.
- The best solution would be to have the same code that is reading/writing the config on falter for bbb-configs. How we could do that, should be decided in the future.
- There should be a way in bbb-configs to write a password automatically to the image. ([#538](https://github.com/freifunk-berlin/bbb-configs/issues/538))
- Namespaces is still a difference between falter and bbb-configs
- We need to discuss in the future which namespaces solution is the best and therefore should be used in falter and bbb-configs
- Proposed format from shmars for [vlan config](https://github.com/freifunk-berlin/bbb-configs/pull/451) should be used. Needs some modification. Should be per host.
- We should take the best from Json from the specs from Noki and Akira and YAML from bbb-configs
- YAML is a subset of JSON, so we can convert the existing configs easily
- JSON has a good set of validation tools (see specs mentioned before)
- The bbb-config file format is tested for some time now, we could be sure that it has most of the stuff we need
- There are some features in the JSON spec, that are missing in bbb-configs (vlans for example)
- The freifunk_mod package might be the problem for the current luci problems. We need to fix this package. We can copy the JS working version. A solution with a fork would be better.
- User should be able to decide, based on the hardware. (Default to tunneldigger on slow hardware)

🚀 We had a consensus that the first boot should be made more easy. The router should work in a limited form without the configuration of a ip address (using ULA iPv6). The wizard will ask for ip registration and other steps of configuration in a gamified way. The service for the ip registration should be accessible in the mesh. ([falter #409](https://github.com/freifunk-berlin/falter-packages/issues/409), [ansible #89](https://github.com/freifunk-berlin/ansible/issues/89))

## Topics parking space:

Topics that need to be discussed in the future. Detailed informations are in the issues. Further ideas and comments could be collected there. The issues are tagged with the label `Need for discussion` and can be listed with an [advanced search](https://github.com/search?q=user%3Afreifunk-berlin+label%3A%22Need+for+discussion%22+state%3Aopen&type=Issues&ref=advsearch&l=&l=) on the freifunk organization. A consensus to these topics should be created on an upcoming feifunk meeting (c-base) or a next community day.

- Future DNS/TLD
- Create an e.V.
- Renovate Website
- Feedback ticket system
- Future of the gateway setup
- Consultation hour
- Namespaces
- Unified provisioning tool